---
layout: post
title: "Intro to quantum"
date: 2020-11-10
category: quantum
tags: beginner
---

Quantum technology represents a new paradigm for the human civilization.

__"Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic"__ Arthur C. Clarke

## Why so spooky?
Simply because it doesn't make sense to us. Our minds are did not develop to grap certain things; for instance, imagine two particles without any apparent connection located on the opposite sides of the universe, and when one particle changes direction then the other instantly changes too - somehow they are linked. How? Why? Wth! Albert Einstein called it "spooky action at a distance", and it is just how the quantum world works.

## Fast and Curious
Quantum mecachanics has allowed us to experiment with the operating systems of nature to advance our computational capabilities.
In simple words, quantum-based computing could make devices such as cellphones and laptop computers millions of times faster.

## We are here
We live in the era of Classical Computing. The human experience has completely changed since the first computing devices were developed. However, just like basically everything in life, it has its pros and cons. As we create these positive changes some results are not predictable, so we are still learning to deal with technology as we prosper and find new challenges.
### The good
Our Classical computing allows us better scrutinize scientific discoveries - which has been crucial in these times of a global coronavirus pandemic. High-performing computers, combined with advanced software and programming, now enable machines to replace humans in routine and complex activities. Then we have self-directed cars and airplanes, we can diagnose diseases, optimize crop yields, numerically model processes and predict climate patters. We are exploring the vastness of space, building better and smarter cities, and even edit our genome to change their function through CRISPR. We improved manufacturing, materials, processing, created more immersive entertainment and learning experiences, and have more sustainable food and energy production.
### The bad
And this is on of our (many) challenges today: a social platform meant to connect people and build comminities turns into a weapon to spread bigottry and hate. That is what are dealing with. Then we have issues of privacy and technology ethics - including who owns our data. Plus the expansion of machines making the decisions on the roads, in hospitals, and even wars. 
Now imagine a person in the bathroom, hearing the call of nature and with a few minutes spare, decides to send a tweet on their smartphone. If it is an important but selfish person - like the deraged president of a country - this message sent will bounce all around the world at the speed of light, and it may influence markets, cause wars, and negativelly affect the life of millions of people. 
### The ugly
Mindlessness. Our future problems may make today's look easy. An entire generation of humans, the e-gen, already present differeces from previous generations, mainly concerning mental health and interpesonal relationships. Plus technology advances, so often does the social gap. How big can this gap get? What will the post-COVID19-gen be like? And the climate-crisis-gen? Will write in future updates.

## Where we will be
There is a limit, however, to our technology connundrum. And it refers to the physical limits of Classical computing capabilities. It is in this context of processing power that quantum computing emerges as the next step on human technological advancements. Quantum computing represents a new paradigm, as how far we will get depends on costs, how much of the quantum phenomena we can control, and how useful/meaningful are the results obtained at that point.
The scientific and commercial use of quantum computing have already begun. Now we can harness this new model of information processing to some real-life problems. Main stream offering is slowly emerging as quantum computing becomes more viable.  

## Human rEvolutions
At around 12,000 years ago humans are thouhgt to begin our Agricultural Revolution. We were farmers, living off the land, and were crafty, producing most of our good by hand. That is how we had always been until the Industrial Revolution started around 300 years ago. Our use of steam power transformed the age of mechanical production and transportation. Then 100 years later another revolution started when electricity was deployed at scale and mass production became a more viable option. Electricity also enabled the invention of telephone, starting an era of global telecommunication that still continues today. In the 1940's, less then 100 years ago, the third revolution started taking place with the invention of transistors, wich enabled the miniaturization of electrical switches. It was accelerated by the US space program, and the application in popular devices such as radio and later handheld calculators. Transistors are the essential building blocks of electronics and Classical computing. They work like switches, enabling or disabling the flow of electricity, wich translates into being on or off. The miniaturization of transistors allowed the production of microchips, which nowadays is are low cost mass production piece of equipment that paved the way for this third Industrial Revolution. An era of digitalization, instead of analog innovation. The chips convert analog information into language of computers - ones and zeros. Certain sequences of zeros and ones are convertioned to represent different letters and numbers. This third revolution was built on transistors made from silicon and still defines our lives today.
Now however a new trend emerges. The convergence of biological, physical and digital worlds are hinting to a fourth Industrial Revolution, combined with physical constraints and processing time issues related to Classical computing, it looks like quantum computing will play a central role in this new era of disruptive change for humanity.

## The Real Deal - the Quantum Realm
A new way of framing and processing information - that is what quantum computing is about. The word "quantum" itself is the smallest discrete unit of a physical property. Quantum mechanics refers to the behaviour of science at the atomic or subatomic scale. As we approach these tiny fundamental buildingblobks of the universe. our knowledge of how things work - or should work - based on traditional science become increasingly challenged. This is us being reminded how little we know about our true essence.

### Classical Computing
Based on classical mechanics - electrons around an atom; electric currents (main ingredient of transistors) are created when electrons move between atoms; electrons move around a circuit and we can predict their location, speed and timing. Later in the 20th century this predictability was replaced by probability; processing at only one two states at any given time - a one or a zero, binary bits; each bit, one and zero, is evaluated in sequence; excellent fault tollerance, the aility to continually operate effctively despite errors
### Quantum Computing
Based on quantum mechanics - describes through various means the interaction and motion of subatomic particles; questions certainty of a particle's behaviour and location at a given time; behavior subject to probability; leverages quantum bits, qubits, which are an induced property of a subatomic particle - can represent a one, zero, both and any value in between, all at the same time, a phenomenon called superposition; compputational outputs in parallel; quantum fault tollerance is still an emerging area.

## Back to some quantum spookiness
In the 20th century we also learned that light can behave like a particle or a wave - property known as wave-particle duality. Prior to the moment they realized and could make sense of what was happening, it was beieved that waves and particles were different and did not occupy the same physical domain. This theory was proven in the 1920s with an experiment demonstrating light waves colliding with particles. The double-slit experiment makes that point, also also shows that a quantu, state must be measured, and it collapses into a state og one or zero, something called a wave-function collapse. 


## Quantical or Clantum?
Classical and quantum mechanics are not in as much conflict as it may sound. Rigorous modelling and experiments show that our understanding of the quantum world is consistent with our observations of physics at a larger scale. Thus we can also imply that quantum computing ultimately explains classical computing. The subatomic probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics enables classic mechanics, which manifests statistically accurate as we predict at the larger real-life scale.
Quantum mechanics has allowed to understand **what keeps electrons in orbit around an atom and how atoms bond to produce molecules**.
The answer to the question in the header: it is quantum stuff - let it be both options!
Because the final output from a qubit is a binary number, it can b eeasily fed into classical computing architecture.
A Classical computing solution tries each possible solution to find the right answer - A Quantum computer guesses many answers in parallel and find a solution in no time.
Many people believe quantum and classical computers will work together. At least for the foreseable future. In this case, processing in a quantum computer could be conditioned to the assessment if the worload would be best processed in a quantum computer. Not all options will be good for quantum solutions.
It is possible that the real, broad use of quantum computing will endup in completely unintuivite uses then today's perspectives. This is often the nature of new technologies - just look at the internet or smartphones.


## Surf the waves - Interference.
Waves play a very large role in quantum mechanics. As waves ripple across, they interact - interfere - with each other. At this point the height, or th eamplitude, of the waves grow or get taller, whle in other they disappear as they cancel each other out. This phenomena is what is used in the design of quantum algoriths, the fact that **some of the waves cause amplitude to maginify while some waves will disappear**. The key then becomes enconding a meaningful result, a solution, into those waves. All of our possible solution then become one of those waves. The worng solutions we want to cancel out and the correct solutions we want to amplify. That is how quantum algorithms are designed.

## The quantum jacuzzi - Superposition
If you touch on opposite sides of a jacuzzi, the waves will ripple out and come together, forming superpositions. We then have crests and throughs that add and subtract from each other in a coherent manner that can be destructive or constructive. The qubits in quantum computing acts similarly by allowing us to manage a one, zero, or both all at the same time. **Superposition is the ability for a qubit to have multiple states simultaneously**. That is the nature, or the physics, of quantum mechanics that enables particles and waves to be in multiple states until a measurement is made - the point in which it collapeses into a zero or one. It can also be exemplified as a coin: it can be head, tail, or both states if we make it spin - the equivalent to superposition. A spining coin, wich is technically head and tail at the same, is analogous to a qubit in superposition. While it is spiining it is neither hear or tail, only when it comes to a rest we know the final result.

## enTango - Entanglement
Entanglement happens when two particles that have no physical connection with each other respond as if they know about each other. Einstein was umvofortable with that, calling it "spooky action at a distance".  Going back to the previous coin spinning example, now imagine you have two coins. When you stop one coin, you have a head or tail. If these two coins were entangled, the second coin would also stop on the opposite side from the first coin - as if both coins know each other. This happens regardless of which one we stop first and what side it rests on - the other will stop at the same time and show the opposite side. In quantum entanglement these calls are particles and can be at any distance from each other, including completely opposite sides of the universe. When one particle gets observed, the other has the opposite measurement. How it happens is not exaclty clear yet - some believe this quantum entanglement is what holds the universe togehter.

## Qubits
Quibts are st the center of how wuantum computers work. They are created by changing the state of certain atoms and other particles the quantum realm. Electrons, the nucleus, and even protons can be used. For instance, to transform an electron into a qubit we can use laser beams, electromagnetic fields, radio waves, and other techniques. Using an electron of phosphorous for example: the process starts placing an atom in a superconducting magnet, forcing the electron into the called spin-down position. To get the electron to spin up, a pulse of microwaves can be fired at it. Stopping the microwave at any point between spin-down and -up creates superposition. It is a now stable, coherent qubit.
We can tie qubits together to create quantum gates, the equivalent to logic gates in Classical computing - these gates take an input, test it, then generates an output. In Classical computing they are called Boolean opperators, and quantum gates are comnceptually similar. Managing quibis, however, can be a daunting task and is one the main obstacles for quantum computing. Vibrations and tamperature fluctations destabilize qubits, hindering computation and causing errors in the output. Current advancements in quibits are being made to reduce these errors for more reliable and confident results.

## Entangling qubits - enTANGOed
A qubit spins until observed, point in which it assumes a up or down position, a one or a zero. IN the case of entagled qubits, when we know the result of one qubit, we know the result of the other. If we tie together many qubits, their entangled partners will be known at the time we measure it. Qubits at scale will produce enormours coputation outputs i parallel, while in cassical computing, based on ones and zeros, each bit is evaluated in sequence.

## Quantum decoherence
Qubits are created using specific atomic particles - such as phosphorous - or photons, which are light waves. A lot of research has been made to solve the technical challenge that is to controllably make these quantum states of matter in a laboratory, and ultimately in a quantum hardware, so that we can have intrinsically, inherently, much more coherent, more stable qubits. This decoherence also explains how quantum mechanics is the basis of classical mechanics - **decoherence ends the quantum state, and the traditional signs of atoms and larger things function as expected**. It is why quantum is ultimately capatible and consistent with the world as we know it.

## Challenges and options


### Creting and leveraging qubits
The technology to qubits production spans from superconducting magnetist to microwaves to lasers. Just like basically everything in life, each technology has their advantage and disadvantage, and it is not clear which will achieve the best results.
The complexity of quantum states is why we like it to process information. It also means that we have more complex errors and in more variety. Correcting errors in quantum computing requires computing; if errors are high enough, the system will spend its time fixing errors and not providing any useful information. Decreasing errors in quantum systems will be paramount as we realize this technology. THe goal for now is to get the error rate down aand having what we can call higher quality, more stable, higher fidelity quibits. Thats is the breakthrough being pushed towards.
Increasing the number of qubits exponentially increase the number of stager that can be processed. But increasing the number of qubits is not greatly advantageous with high error rates.

### Application development
Quantum computers require their own algorithms, operating systems, and programming platforms. Unfortunately Microsoft Window cannot be installed on a quantum coputer. In fact, it will need non-existing technologies to integrate them into more well-stablished technological ecosystems. Quantum Computing-as-a-Service is already being seeked in Canada, for example (https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/101.nsf/eng/00120.html).
Currently, quantum computers exist but there are still major technological gaps to fill.

### Us, the Human Resources
We managed to get things up to this point, now we need get ready for the next step. More people are needed in the quantum department. Broader adoption when more reporting and breakthroughs available, popularizing and dismystizing the theme. MOre talents will be needs across all areas from developers to analystis, from engineers to implementers, from strategy advisors to documentation writers, and beyond. The more participation in universities, incubators and startups. And the future looks promising.
There are quantum professionals matching the process of understanding what a quantum computer can do with  the problems that enterprise customers and partners have.


## How far can we go?
[Topological qubits](/link https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_quantum_computer) will take us to a new era technologywise. This is subjec to ongoing research and its realization will snowball other technologies to revolutionize the application of quantum computing. It is a much easier than other systems like superconducting qubits.

## State-of-art: 

Quantum computers have been buil since the 1990 -it is a Milleninal. Major advances have been made, such as systems that support many qubits are now being used in a still experimental, but advanced stage. Both individuals and enterprises can use it. How ever **high performance, fault-tolerant solutions are still being pursued**.
The quantum computers used today are categorized into prototype and experimental, and the technology is already contributing to decisions in a variery of important industries.
Here are a few examples of quantum computing implementations.

### Players
### IBM
Major quantum compting player. IBM is a grandfather in the research and experimentation in quantum computing, building several prototype machines adn simulators. Called Q series, these computers are located across the globe and have different implementations, such as number of qubits ranging from 5 to 32. They are available for us to explore. IBM also created **Qiskit**, an open source quantum software development kit, and the **IBM Q Experience**, a virtual interface for coding. Read more here https://quantum-computing.ibm.com/.

### Microsoft
Over a decade working on both hardware and software for quantum computers. The developed a quantum focused programming language called **Q#**, which can be integrated with Visual Studio and the Python language. Microsft takes an approach that works with classican and quantum computers - first a classical computer would deterimne if the worload is better processed in a quantum computer, second the workload is uploaded to the quantum coputing platform, finally the results will be available throuhg Microsoft's Azure service.

### Google
Now deep in the business of quantum computing research and development. Focused on quantum powering artificial intelligence, developed through both hardware and software. Bristlecone, their current quantum processor, supports 72 qubits. They have also created to open source platforms for developers: **Cirq** is for experimenting qith quantum algorithms and **OpenFermion** for working on chemical and material sciences problems.

### D-Wave
Founded in 1999 and often referred to as the first commercial quantum company. It develops both hardware and software. Their technology uses quantum annealing. Their system had been used to develop over 100 applications, inlcuding those in cyber-security, optimization, financial analysis, manufacturing processes, and more.


### Amazon, Alibaba, etc.
Amazon Web Services should soon offer cloud-based quantum processing, a similar path pursued by China's Alibaba. Other technology vendors such as Fujitsu, HP, Hitachi, and Intell, are all investign resources into quantum coputing research and services.

### Startups
There is a healthy ecosystem of startups emerging. This increased investment and support points to an industry in the verge of significant expansion. There are opportunites to solve great problems - like climate change, food proudction and healthcare - and in security space. More marketplace participants are necessary to support all the needs that quantum computing requires to succeed broadly. 

## State-of-art: Applications
Quantum computers are not yet widely adopted by industry, although it can potentially impact many industries. It is better applied in areas where big computing are needed. Problems such as in chemistry or material sciences, where classical coputers can't get the level of accuracy required in understanding a molecule. Quantum computer can solve problems that would take longer than the lifetime of the universe to be completed in a classical computer. 
Current users are limited to nig industries or research in academia. Some of these industries include NASA, Google, and Los Alamos National Laboratory.
### Aviation
Lockheed Martina and Airbus use quanti, cpmputing for aeronautical modelling. FOr example, to aid in the routing and scheduling of aircrafts to provide commercial benefits of time and costs.

 ### Automobile
Volkswagen and Daimler use quantum computers to find performance improvements by producing better chemical compositions of electric vehicle batteries. Volkswagen has successfully developed and tested an **optimization algorithm**  for the traffic flow of 10,000 taxis in Beijing.

### Biotechnology
BioGen is experimenting with **quantum-enabled optimization** to predict the potential therapeutic approaches while reducing negative side effects. The pharmaceutical industry has also great potential to use quantum to speed up drug research and development. In times of a global pandemic, that is even more thrilling news. Nitrogen fixation, is used foro agricultural purposes in fertilizers, but its production uses few percent of the world's consumption of electricity. But some bacterias undergo this process at room temperature, so we know there are more efficient ways to do it yet, and quantum coputing can provide this pathway to learn about these systems and solve these complex problems.


### Public experiments
The first use of quantum computers for many user swill be as a scientific instrument.
Use a telescope to see far, a microscope to see small, and a quantum computer to "see" the quantum realm. These are all instruments we use to help make sense of things and make them useful to us.
A game or something for people to get a sense of what the quantum really is. A huge thing for humanity to understand and interact with the quantum world.https://quantumgame.io/info
For entrepreneurs, innovators and organizations, the opportunities are abundant and ripe for exploring.

## Quantum for you
The vastness of quantum possibilites and needs mean there's also vast opportunities for users.
Look across the landscape and see where is your passion. What is the thing you are realy excited about to drive forward? Then find that intersection with quantum computing. Because it is a different way of computing, you have to undersntad to how quantum computers work. Some linear algebra and basic understaing of machine learning are helpful. Of course, learn quantum mechamics, so you undersnta dhow quantum computers work. Thermodynamics and engineering knowledge of what happens at very low temperatures are also valuable.






### Heterogeneous cloud



If quantum computing was in job interview being asked "What are your short- and long-term goals?" I think they would respond "The short is not to be abandoned and dye-out, the long-term is be relevant and popular".







